DOC COMPASS — SLIDE DRAFT FOR 5 OCT
8–10 minutes, 9 slides, about 1 minute each. Each title is the claim; the visual is the proof.
Speaker split is a suggestion: both of you present at least one slide.


SLIDE 1 — TITLE (Sohum, 20 s)
Title:   Doc Compass: which doctor do I book?
On it:   One line: "Describe a health concern in your own words. Get the kind of doctor to book."
         Names, course, date.
Say:     We built a tool that routes a health concern to a kind of doctor. It never diagnoses.


SLIDE 2 — MOTIVATION (Sohum, 1 min)
Title:   In the US, picking the right specialist is the patient's job, and a wrong pick means paying and waiting twice
On it:   A three-step picture of the wrong path: book a specialist -> "you need a different doctor"
         -> start again (another copay, another waitlist).
         Small text: specialties are split finely (podiatry vs orthopedics, optometry vs ophthalmology).
Say:     We are both international students and have both booked the wrong door. Insurance
         directories list specialties but don't say which one fits your problem.
         What we automate: the first decision, "which door do I knock on?"


SLIDE 3 — WHAT IT DOES (Sohum, 45 s)
Title:   Doc Compass answers one narrow question, and always offers "Start with a GP"
On it:   Screenshot of the app with a result: the blue sign "Book an appointment with Dermatology",
         the top three with bars, and the questions to bring.
         Three callouts on the screenshot:
           1. top 3 with confidence, not one verdict
           2. "Start with a GP" is always an option
           3. "routing, not diagnosis" disclaimer
Say:     Routing, not diagnosis. Nothing typed is stored.


SLIDE 4 — DESIGN (Akshara, 1 min 15 s)
Title:   Hand-written rules catch emergencies before any model runs
On it:   Simplified system diagram, left to right:
           concern -> [1 red-flag rules] -> [2 scrub] -> [3 router] -> [4 explanation]
           red arrow from 1 straight to "Seek emergency care now"
         Note under box 1: 11 rules, each quoting a published warning sign (MedlinePlus / NIH, CDC).
Say:     The emergency check is deliberately not learned: a rule we can read and cite is safer
         than a model we have to trust. Only if no rule fires does the router run.


SLIDE 5 — DATA (Akshara, 1 min 15 s)
Title:   No public dataset fit the task, so we labelled real patient posts ourselves
On it:   Left: what exists and why it doesn't fit (3 short rows)
           clinician notes (MTSamples)        -> doctor's language, not a patient's
           synthetic triage sets               -> machine-written textbook cases
           Patient Comments (Mendeley)         -> one-line comments, not real posts;
                                                  we use it only for pre-training
         Right: our dataset
           600 real r/AskDocs posts (from 10,366 unique posts in MediQ_AskDocs)
           label = which doctor to book: 11 specialties + "Start with a GP"
           split by post: 400 train / 50 dev / 150 test; 60 test posts labelled by both of us
Say:     The label is a door, not a diagnosis, so it can follow a written guideline.
         Posts that aren't a "which doctor" question are skipped. Post text never leaves our laptops;
         we share ids and labels only.


SLIDE 6 — MODELS (Sohum, 1 min 15 s)
Title:   Two kinds of router tie on public data; an off-the-shelf LLM explains
On it:   Table (stage 1, same 938 held-out public comments):
           Model                              Type            Top-1     Top-3    Macro-F1
           TF-IDF + logistic regression       from scratch    94.0%     98.6%    0.902
           DistilRoBERTa                      fine-tuned      94.3%     99.0%    0.908
           BiomedBERT                         fine-tuned      94.2%     98.8%    0.904
         Small diagram: Stage 1: 6,252 public comments (938 of them held out for this table)
                        -> Stage 2: our 400 posts -> test on our 150
         Footnote: 95% intervals overlap (about ±1.6 points), so the three are tied on public data.
                   The public comments are short and alike, so ~94% is an easy score.
                   Our own 150 posts are the real test.
Say:     Stage 1 teaches the task on public data; stage 2 adapts to how real people write.
         One research question: does BiomedBERT, pretrained on biomedical research papers,
         beat a general encoder on patients' words? On public data: no difference.
         (BiomedBERT is also twice as deep, 12 layers to 6, so it is not a like-for-like test.)
         Off-the-shelf: Qwen2.5-1.5B writes the reason and the questions and is never trained.
         Its text is checked before it is shown, and fixed wording is the fallback.


SLIDE 7 — DEMO (both, 1 min 30 s)
Title:   From a sentence to a door in a few seconds
On it:   The demo video (about 60 s), full slide. In the corner, the QR code for the live app,
         taken from the notebook run just before the talk.
Video:   1. rash example                   -> blue sign "Book an appointment with Dermatology",
                                              then the reason and questions
         2. knee example                   -> Orthopedics
         3. chest pain example             -> red sign "Seek emergency care now", nothing else runs
         4. optional: ringing ears example -> amber sign, two options, "you decide"
            (this clip only appears with the from-scratch router; see the check list)
Say:     Gradio Spaces on Hugging Face now need a paid plan, so the app runs from a Colab notebook.


SLIDE 8 — WHEN IT ISN'T SURE (Akshara, 1 min)
Title:   When the router is unsure, it shows two options and lets the user decide
On it:   Two screenshots side by side: a blue sign (one answer) and an amber sign (two options).
         One line: unsure = top confidence below a cutoff, or the top two close together.
         Small text: the cutoffs are placeholders until they are tuned on our dev posts.
Say:     A confident wrong answer is the worst outcome for a routing tool. So an unsure result
         never pretends to be one answer, and "Start with a GP" is the fallback.


SLIDE 9 — REFLECTION AND NEXT STEPS (both, 1 min 15 s)
Title:   Public data got us running fast, and showed us exactly where it breaks
On it:   Went well
           - rules-first design: the emergency path is readable and cited
           - a public set let the whole app work before our own labels existed
         Went poorly
           - the public set only knows "bleeding" as an Ob-Gyn word: the fine-tuned routers send
             "my gums bleed when I brush" to Ob-Gyn at 94–96%
           - fine-tuned routers are over-confident (98–99% on easy inputs), so the two-option
             state rarely appears until the cutoffs are tuned
           - we dropped redaction to focus on routing
         Next
           - stage 2: train on our own posts, then report results on our own 150 test posts,
             against "always GP" and against the from-scratch router
           - tune the unsure cutoffs on dev
Say:     The gums example is our favourite failure: the model is fluent and wrong, which is
         why the test set is our own posts and not the public data.
Then:    "Questions?"


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CHECK BEFORE PRESENTING (not for the slides)

True today:
  - every number on slide 6, the 11 rules and their sources, the 10,366 / 6,252 counts,
    the label set, the gums example, the three sign colours.
  - Qwen writes the reason and questions whenever the app runs with it (the Colab notebook on a
    GPU, or --llm locally).

Only true once the work is finished:
  - Slide 5 "we labelled": true once the 600 posts are labelled. If it isn't done by the talk,
    say "we are labelling".
  - Slide 9 has no accuracy on your own posts on purpose. Don't add one until it is measured.

Practical:
  - QR code: it is new on every launch and dies when the notebook stops. Run the notebook
    10-15 minutes before the talk and paste that run's QR code into slide 7.
  - Timing: a result took about 3 seconds with Qwen on the Mac. It was not timed on Colab.
  - The amber two-option sign (video clip 4, slide 8) does not appear with the fine-tuned router
    yet. To capture it, run locally with the from-scratch router:
      DOCCOMPASS_ROUTER=tfidf_stage1 python -m doccompass.app --llm
    and say in the talk that this clip uses the from-scratch router.

Likely questions: Why not an LLM for everything? How do you know your labels are right?
What stops it giving medical advice? What about the emergencies the rules miss?
